README.md, before:

# LEMBAS-RNN benchmarking project
[![License: BSD-3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-BSD_3--Clause-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](LICENSE)
[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue?style=flat-square&logo=python)](https://www.python.org/)
[![Data Requests](https://img.shields.io/badge/data_requests-zcbtcl9%40ucl.ac.uk-informational?style=flat-square&logo=gmail)](https://github.com/ChristianLangridge)

A benchmarking framework for evaluating a novel biologically-informed RNN architecture [LEMBAS-RNN](https://github.com/czhang0701/DLBionet) designed by Li *et al*, 2025 [UNPUBLISHED] against standard regression baseline models to predict target gene expression from transcription factor (TF) expression values in human liver tissue (bulk-RNA-seq)

***Rotational project in Roger Williams Institute for Liver Studies at King's College London with Dr. Cheng Zhang***

---

# Table of Contents

- [Background](#background)
- [Architecture Overview](#architecture-overview)
- [Models Benchmarked](#models-benchmarked)
- [Results Summary](#results-summary)
- [Repository Structure](#repository-structure)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Data Requirements](#data-requirements)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [SHAP Interpretability](#shap-interpretability)
- [Known Issues & Limitations](#known-issues--limitations)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

---

## Background

Gene expression prediction is a central interest in Systems Biology. Transcription factors (TFs) regulate the expression of target genes through a complex biological signalling network. Classical machine learning approaches (linear regression, tree-based models) treat this task as a black-box tabular problem and do not take into account for previously validated network topology. 

LEMBAS-RNN builds on this strategy: using a central RNN constrained by a real biological signalling network represented in latent space `network.tsv`, embedding known TF-target regulatory interactions directly for model training using Michaelis-Menten-like (MML) activation functions. This produces a model that is both biologically-informed and compatible with post-hoc explainability techniques like [SHAP analysis](https://github.com/shap/shap). 

This repository benchmarks LEMBAS-RNN against two standard baseline models - Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) and XGBoost Random Forest Regression (XGBRF) - using a held-out test set and an independent external validation cohort of human liver bulk-RNA-seq data provided by [Yang H. *et al*, 2025](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39889710/)

---

## Architecture Overview

LEMBAS-RNN is made of separate modules:

<p align="center"> <img width="601" height="195" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6feb6fc4-92d3-4d0f-9f3e-849a1f93eaba" />


**Key Designs**

*Add here if desired*

---

## Models Benchmarked

| **Model** | **Type** | **Hyperparameter choices** |
| --------- | -------- | -------------------------- |
| MLR | Multiple Linear Regressor | n_jobs=-1, sklearn LinearRegression() |
| XGBRF | XGBoost Random Forest Regressor | n_estimators=3, objective=reg:squarederror,random_state=888, trained in batches of 1,000 targets | 
| LEMBAS-RNN | Biologically-informed RNN | target_steps=150, max_steps=10, exp_factor=50, leak=0.01, tolerance=1e-20 |

---

## Results Summary 

All metrics computed on unseen validation set (262 samples, 16,100 target genes)

Aggregate Performance (Validation Set)

| **Model** | **Flattened R²** | **Pearson's R** | **RMSE** | **MAE** |
| --------- | ---------------- | ------------------------- | -------- | ------- |
| MLR | 0.9528 | 0.9764 | 0.1261 | 0.0726 |
| XGBRF | 0.9346 | 0.9669 | 0.1484 | 0.0884 |
| **LEMBAS-RNN** | **0.8441** | **0.9246** | **0.2290** | **0.1576** |

> **Note on R² methods:** `sklearn`'s `.score()` computes uniform-average R² across genes. The `compute_metrics()` function in this repo computes variance-weighted (flattened) R², which is substantially higher because the model model performance is heterogenous and disproportionately better on medium-variance genes.

---

## Installation 

**Prerequisites**

- Python 3.12+
- A CUDA-capable GPU is recommended for RNN training (CPU inference is supported)

### 1. Clone the repository 

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ChristianLangridge/LEMBAS-RNN-benchmark.git
cd LEMBAS-RNN-benchmark
```

### 2. Create and activate a conda environment using lembasrnn_benchmark.yml 

```bash
conda env create -f lembasrnn_benchmark.yml 
```

> **Note for GPU support:** install the appropriate `torch` build for your CUDA version from [pytorch.org](https://pytorch.org)
>
>> *see lembasrnn_benchmark.yml for further dependecy specifications*

---

## Data Requirements 

This repository does **NOT** include the required data files (too large for version control). Can be sent on request using using the email badge listed at the top of the file. 

| File | Description | Expected Shape |
|---|---|---|
| `TF(full).tsv` | TF expression matrix (samples × TFs) | ~15,935 × 1,197 |
| `Geneexpression (full).tsv` | Target gene expression (samples × genes) | ~15,935 × 16,100 |
| `network(full).tsv` | Biological regulatory network (TF, Gene, Interaction) | ~1,153,904 × 3 |
| `Liver_bulk_external.tsv` | External validation cohort | ~262 x 16,100 |


### Setting Up Data Paths

> ⚠️ **Current Limitation:** Data paths are currently hardcoded to the original development machine. Before running any scripts, you will need to update the paths in each script to point to your local copies of the data files. This is a known issue — a centralised `config/paths.py` with environment variable support is planned (see [Known Issues](#known-issues--limitations)).

**Quick fix** — search for and replace all instances of the base path:

```bash
# Find all hardcoded path references
grep -r "/home/christianl/Zhang-Lab" . --include="*.py" -l

# Then update each file to point to your data directory
```

### Network File Format

`network(full).tsv` must have exactly these three columns:

```
TF          Gene        Interaction
TP53        CDKN1A      1
MYC         CDK4        1
BRCA1       PTEN        -1
...
```

`Interaction` must be numeric (`1` = activation, `-1` = inhibition).

---

## Usage

### 1. Data Preprocessing

All models share the same preprocessing boilerplate. Run this first to generate `x_train`, `x_test`, `y_train`, `y_test`:

```python
%run 'benchmarking/data preprocessing/model_boilerplate_remote.py'
```

This script:
- Loads TF and gene expression data
- Filters TFs to those present in the biological network (ensures all models use identical features)
- Applies an 80/20 train/test split with `random_state=888`

### 2. Training the Baseline Models

**MLR:**
```bash
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/model scripts/MLR/MLR.ipynb"
```

**XGBRF** (trains 16,100 targets in batches of 1,000 — expect ~20–60 min on a multi-core machine):
```bash
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/model scripts/XGBRF/XGBRF.ipynb"
```

### 3. Loading and Testing the RNN

The RNN is loaded from a saved checkpoint using `load_model_from_checkpoint()`:

```python
from benchmarking.model_scripts.LEMBAS_RNN.RNN_reconstructor import load_model_from_checkpoint

model = load_model_from_checkpoint(
    checkpoint_path='path/to/signaling_model.v1.pt',
    net_path='path/to/network(full).tsv',
    X_in_df=x_test_df,
    y_out_df=y_test_df,
    device='cpu',
    use_exact_training_params=True
)
```

Full inference walkthrough is in `benchmarking/model scripts/LEMBAS-RNN/RNN_testing.ipynb`.

### 4. Generating Benchmark Figures

```bash
# Training set fit (Fig 1A/B)
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/figures/Model-fitting/Fig1(fitting).ipynb"

# Test set performance (Fig 2A)
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/figures/Model-testing/Fig1.ipynb"

# External validation (Fig 3A)
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/figures/Model-validation/Fig1(validation).ipynb"
```

### 5. Generating Predictions Programmatically

```bash
python config/predictions/model_train_test_predictions.py
```

This script loads all three trained models and saves prediction arrays for downstream analysis.

---

## SHAP Interpretability

SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) analysis is computed for two clinically relevant liver genes — **ALB** (Albumin) and **AFP** (Alpha-fetoprotein) — across all three models using the external validation cohort.

| Model | SHAP Method | Notes |
|---|---|---|
| MLR | `LinearExplainer` | Exact, fast |
| XGBRF | `TreeExplainer` | Exact, fast |
| RNN | `GradientExplainer` | Approximate; `n_samples=25`, `background=50` for feasibility |

### Running SHAP Analysis

```bash
# Baseline models (MLR + XGBRF)
python config/SHAP/SHAP_generation_baseline.py

# RNN (slow — optimised for feasibility with reduced sample counts)
python config/SHAP/SHAP_generation_RNN.py

# Load, validate, and plot saved SHAP values
python config/SHAP/SHAP_value_test_load_plot.py
```

SHAP outputs are saved as `.npz` files containing per-gene SHAP arrays, expected values, and feature names. Waterfall plots are generated for each model × gene combination in a publication-quality 2×3 grid.

---

## Known Issues & Limitations

### ⚠️ Hardcoded Absolute Paths
All scripts currently use absolute paths specific to the original development machine (`/home/christianl/Zhang-Lab/...`). A centralised `config/paths.py` with environment variable support is the planned fix. Until then, you must manually update paths before running any script.

### ⚠️ Feature Count Mismatch (1196 vs 1197 TFs)
The saved RNN checkpoint was trained on 1,197 TF features. The current `network(full).tsv` produces an intersection of 1,196 usable TFs. Loading the checkpoint against the current network will raise:

```
RuntimeError: size mismatch for input_layer.weights
```

**Workaround:** Either retrain the RNN on 1,196 features (recommended for reproducibility), or reconstruct the original network file that produced 1,197 features. See `RNN_testing.ipynb` Step 6 for a full diagnostic.

### ⚠️ No Automated Test Suite
There is currently no `tests/` directory or CI pipeline. Unit and integration tests are planned.

### RNN SHAP is Slow
GradientExplainer on the full RNN is computationally expensive due to the iterative steady-state forward pass. Background samples have been aggressively reduced (`n_background=50`, `n_test=262`, `n_samples=25`). Expect ~30–60 minutes per gene on CPU.

---

## Contributing

This is an active research project. If you'd like to contribute:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/your-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add: your feature'`)
4. Push and open a Pull Request

Please ensure any new scripts avoid hardcoded paths and include basic inline documentation.

---

## Citation

If you use this codebase or the LEMBAS-RNN architecture in your work, please cite:

```
Langridge, C. (2025–2026). LEMBAS-RNN Benchmarking Project.
Rotational project, King's College London, Zhang Lab.
https://github.com/ChristianLangridge/LEMBAS-RNN-benchmark
```

---

## License

This project is licensed under the BSD-3-Clause License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

*Developed as part of a rotational PhD project at King's College London in collaboration with Dr. Cheng Zhang.*

Commit message:

Revise feature count mismatch explanation in README
Updated feature count mismatch section for clarity and accuracy.

README.md, after:

# LEMBAS-RNN benchmarking project
[![License: BSD-3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-BSD_3--Clause-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](LICENSE)
[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue?style=flat-square&logo=python)](https://www.python.org/)
[![Data Requests](https://img.shields.io/badge/data_requests-zcbtcl9%40ucl.ac.uk-informational?style=flat-square&logo=gmail)](https://github.com/ChristianLangridge)

A benchmarking framework for evaluating a novel biologically-informed RNN architecture [LEMBAS-RNN](https://github.com/czhang0701/DLBionet) designed by Li *et al*, 2025 [UNPUBLISHED] against standard regression baseline models to predict target gene expression from transcription factor (TF) expression values in human liver tissue (bulk-RNA-seq)

***Rotational project in Roger Williams Institute for Liver Studies at King's College London with Dr. Cheng Zhang***

---

# Table of Contents

- [Background](#background)
- [Architecture Overview](#architecture-overview)
- [Models Benchmarked](#models-benchmarked)
- [Results Summary](#results-summary)
- [Repository Structure](#repository-structure)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Data Requirements](#data-requirements)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [SHAP Interpretability](#shap-interpretability)
- [Known Issues & Limitations](#known-issues--limitations)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

---

## Background

Gene expression prediction is a central interest in Systems Biology. Transcription factors (TFs) regulate the expression of target genes through a complex biological signalling network. Classical machine learning approaches (linear regression, tree-based models) treat this task as a black-box tabular problem and do not take into account for previously validated network topology. 

LEMBAS-RNN builds on this strategy: using a central RNN constrained by a real biological signalling network represented in latent space `network.tsv`, embedding known TF-target regulatory interactions directly for model training using Michaelis-Menten-like (MML) activation functions. This produces a model that is both biologically-informed and compatible with post-hoc explainability techniques like [SHAP analysis](https://github.com/shap/shap). 

This repository benchmarks LEMBAS-RNN against two standard baseline models - Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) and XGBoost Random Forest Regression (XGBRF) - using a held-out test set and an independent external validation cohort of human liver bulk-RNA-seq data provided by [Yang H. *et al*, 2025](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39889710/)

---

## Architecture Overview

LEMBAS-RNN is made of separate modules:

<p align="center"> <img width="601" height="195" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6feb6fc4-92d3-4d0f-9f3e-849a1f93eaba" />


**Key Designs**

*Add here if desired*

---

## Models Benchmarked

| **Model** | **Type** | **Hyperparameter choices** |
| --------- | -------- | -------------------------- |
| MLR | Multiple Linear Regressor | n_jobs=-1, sklearn LinearRegression() |
| XGBRF | XGBoost Random Forest Regressor | n_estimators=3, objective=reg:squarederror,random_state=888, trained in batches of 1,000 targets | 
| LEMBAS-RNN | Biologically-informed RNN | target_steps=150, max_steps=10, exp_factor=50, leak=0.01, tolerance=1e-20 |

---

## Results Summary 

All metrics computed on unseen validation set (262 samples, 16,100 target genes)

Aggregate Performance (Validation Set)

| **Model** | **Flattened R²** | **Pearson's R** | **RMSE** | **MAE** |
| --------- | ---------------- | ------------------------- | -------- | ------- |
| MLR | 0.9528 | 0.9764 | 0.1261 | 0.0726 |
| XGBRF | 0.9346 | 0.9669 | 0.1484 | 0.0884 |
| **LEMBAS-RNN** | **0.8441** | **0.9246** | **0.2290** | **0.1576** |

> **Note on R² methods:** `sklearn`'s `.score()` computes uniform-average R² across genes. The `compute_metrics()` function in this repo computes variance-weighted (flattened) R², which is substantially higher because the model model performance is heterogenous and disproportionately better on medium-variance genes.

---

## Installation 

**Prerequisites**

- Python 3.12+
- A CUDA-capable GPU is recommended for RNN training (CPU inference is supported)

### 1. Clone the repository 

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ChristianLangridge/LEMBAS-RNN-benchmark.git
cd LEMBAS-RNN-benchmark
```

### 2. Create and activate a conda environment using lembasrnn_benchmark.yml 

```bash
conda env create -f lembasrnn_benchmark.yml 
```

> **Note for GPU support:** install the appropriate `torch` build for your CUDA version from [pytorch.org](https://pytorch.org)
>
>> *see lembasrnn_benchmark.yml for further dependecy specifications*

---

## Data Requirements 

This repository does **NOT** include the required data files (too large for version control). Can be sent on request using using the email badge listed at the top of the file. 

| File | Description | Expected Shape |
|---|---|---|
| `TF(full).tsv` | TF expression matrix (samples × TFs) | ~15,935 × 1,197 |
| `Geneexpression (full).tsv` | Target gene expression (samples × genes) | ~15,935 × 16,100 |
| `network(full).tsv` | Biological regulatory network (TF, Gene, Interaction) | ~1,153,904 × 3 |
| `Liver_bulk_external.tsv` | External validation cohort | ~262 x 16,100 |


### Setting Up Data Paths

> ⚠️ **Current Limitation:** Data paths are currently hardcoded to the original development machine. Before running any scripts, you will need to update the paths in each script to point to your local copies of the data files. This is a known issue — a centralised `config/paths.py` with environment variable support is planned (see [Known Issues](#known-issues--limitations)).

**Quick fix** — search for and replace all instances of the base path:

```bash
# Find all hardcoded path references
grep -r "/home/christianl/Zhang-Lab" . --include="*.py" -l

# Then update each file to point to your data directory
```

### Network File Format

`network(full).tsv` must have exactly these three columns:

```
TF          Gene        Interaction
TP53        CDKN1A      1
MYC         CDK4        1
BRCA1       PTEN        -1
...
```

`Interaction` must be numeric (`1` = activation, `-1` = inhibition).

---

## Usage

### 1. Data Preprocessing

All models share the same preprocessing boilerplate. Run this first to generate `x_train`, `x_test`, `y_train`, `y_test`:

```python
%run 'benchmarking/data preprocessing/model_boilerplate_remote.py'
```

This script:
- Loads TF and gene expression data
- Filters TFs to those present in the biological network (ensures all models use identical features)
- Applies an 80/20 train/test split with `random_state=888`

### 2. Training the Baseline Models

**MLR:**
```bash
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/model scripts/MLR/MLR.ipynb"
```

**XGBRF** (trains 16,100 targets in batches of 1,000 — expect ~20–60 min on a multi-core machine):
```bash
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/model scripts/XGBRF/XGBRF.ipynb"
```

### 3. Loading and Testing the RNN

The RNN is loaded from a saved checkpoint using `load_model_from_checkpoint()`:

```python
from benchmarking.model_scripts.LEMBAS_RNN.RNN_reconstructor import load_model_from_checkpoint

model = load_model_from_checkpoint(
    checkpoint_path='path/to/signaling_model.v1.pt',
    net_path='path/to/network(full).tsv',
    X_in_df=x_test_df,
    y_out_df=y_test_df,
    device='cpu',
    use_exact_training_params=True
)
```

Full inference walkthrough is in `benchmarking/model scripts/LEMBAS-RNN/RNN_testing.ipynb`.

### 4. Generating Benchmark Figures

```bash
# Training set fit (Fig 1A/B)
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/figures/Model-fitting/Fig1(fitting).ipynb"

# Test set performance (Fig 2A)
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/figures/Model-testing/Fig1.ipynb"

# External validation (Fig 3A)
jupyter notebook "benchmarking/figures/Model-validation/Fig1(validation).ipynb"
```

### 5. Generating Predictions Programmatically

```bash
python config/predictions/model_train_test_predictions.py
```

This script loads all three trained models and saves prediction arrays for downstream analysis.

---

## SHAP Interpretability

SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) analysis is computed for two clinically relevant liver genes — **ALB** (Albumin) and **AFP** (Alpha-fetoprotein) — across all three models using the external validation cohort.

| Model | SHAP Method | Notes |
|---|---|---|
| MLR | `LinearExplainer` | Exact, fast |
| XGBRF | `TreeExplainer` | Exact, fast |
| RNN | `GradientExplainer` | Approximate; `n_samples=25`, `background=50` for feasibility |

### Running SHAP Analysis

```bash
# Baseline models (MLR + XGBRF)
python config/SHAP/SHAP_generation_baseline.py

# RNN (slow — optimised for feasibility with reduced sample counts)
python config/SHAP/SHAP_generation_RNN.py

# Load, validate, and plot saved SHAP values
python config/SHAP/SHAP_value_test_load_plot.py
```

SHAP outputs are saved as `.npz` files containing per-gene SHAP arrays, expected values, and feature names. Waterfall plots are generated for each model × gene combination in a publication-quality 2×3 grid.

---

## Known Issues & Limitations

### ⚠️ Hardcoded Absolute Paths
All scripts currently use absolute paths specific to the original development machine (`/home/christianl/Zhang-Lab/...`). A centralised `config/paths.py` with environment variable support is the planned fix. Until then, you must manually update paths before running any script.

### ⚠️ Feature Count Importance (1197 TFs and 16,100 target genes)
The saved RNN checkpoint was trained on 1,197 TF features and 16,100 target genes and the `network(full).tsv` file is alligned with that. . Loading the checkpoint against a different network file or with different input dimensions will raise:

```
RuntimeError: size mismatch for input_layer.weights
```

**Workaround:** Either retrain the RNN on new number of features (recommended for reproducibility) using a new, aligned network file, or filter only inputs that match `network(full).tsv` and fill missing feature columnns with zero values. See `RNN_testing.ipynb` Step 6 for a full diagnostic.

### ⚠️ No Automated Test Suite
There is currently no `tests/` directory or CI pipeline. Unit and integration tests are planned.

### RNN SHAP is Slow
GradientExplainer on the full RNN is computationally expensive due to the iterative steady-state forward pass. Background samples have been aggressively reduced (`n_background=50`, `n_test=262`, `n_samples=25`). Expect ~30–60 minutes per gene on CPU.

---

## Contributing

This is an active research project. If you'd like to contribute:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/your-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add: your feature'`)
4. Push and open a Pull Request

Please ensure any new scripts avoid hardcoded paths and include basic inline documentation.

---

## Citation

If you use this codebase or the LEMBAS-RNN architecture in your work, please cite:

```
Langridge, C. (2025–2026). LEMBAS-RNN Benchmarking Project.
Rotational project, King's College London, Zhang Lab.
https://github.com/ChristianLangridge/LEMBAS-RNN-benchmark
```

---

## License

This project is licensed under the BSD-3-Clause License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

*Developed as part of a rotational PhD project at King's College London in collaboration with Dr. Cheng Zhang.*
